Now, on this College Hills area, were there a lot of
trees on this area, or were most of these trees
planted? Was this mostly cotton fields? This was
primarily a cotton field area. When I first moved
into this home in about 39, you could still see the
old drills throughout the area. Incidentally,
the city hall that you see down here, too, done
during my tenure as mayor we used to be located over
in the old city hall that's at the north gate over
there right and prior to that well when we first
started out as a city we were in the building a
two-story building over on south side that
constituted our office part-time secretary and
city manager and the city council It was very small
indeed, and gradually we went over to, we finally
went to the north side, Northgate area, and then
proceeded to, with the new city hall in the
location where it is now. And it was about that
time, or at that time, that we also instituted a
fire department with some of our own men, and you
were acquainted, of course, with the fire station
here. I was curious about that a while ago. You said
something about the A&M providing the fire
protection for our college station at that time.
Now, could you give me an example or something, or
do you ever remember when there was a fire, and how
did that actually work, anyway? Well, when
there's a fire, Jerry, well, we usually call the
fire number over at the power plant, And they had
the fire truck readiness at all times. So it served
as our... Now, we did pay a nominal amount to the
university for the service at the time. But I know
that it cost them quite a bit. And, of course, even
those that served in the fire department were
volunteer firemen. Most of them worked in the
power plant or in an area that... In case of the
fire, well, the truck went by, and they jumped on
the truck, and off they went to help us out. I see.
Yeah. But I think it's interesting to point out,
too, that some of my opposition, when I was trying
to get the bond issue passed for the city hall and
the fire station, said that we did not need a fire
station. He did not reckon this was a council
meeting. And he didn't want a fire station. He said
that it would be better if a home were to burn to the
ground and get full restitution rather than have a
fire department. Now, this is some of the
philosophy that I was bucking and trying to make
for a progressive community. I was going to say, it
doesn't seem to be too progressive for a
councilman. No, but this was the view I... As a
matter of fact, when I went in and first had all this
trouble on the city council and they were voting
down everything that I was trying to do for the
community, I got with the news people, the radio
station and newspapers. Yeah, the TV was then...
Yeah, the TV station was then here, and explained
to them my dilemma, and I sought their
cooperation. And Mike Mistovich pledged that he
would boost my presentation on the TV station.
That has boosted in terms of letting the public
know that I was to appear several weeks before I
appeared on TV. And that was, I had the one-hour
program right after Kosygin, who was in the United
States, and it had a good listening audience. And I
went prepared with charts and maps. and spoke to
the public for one hour. It was public service
time. I had a good listening audience. That's
prime time. It sounded like that. That's right.
And right after, Kosygin was featured. And I
invited the public out to the next council
meeting. And at the next council meeting, I
brought up things that the public were interested
in, but the majority against me would not endorse.
Well, following that meeting, that was all that
was needed on the part of the public to get riled up.
And at the next council election, well, the people
themselves saw that they went out with a landslide
against them. And it was only then that we were able
to get in gear and do many of the things that needed
to be done in the community. As I said, you know,
there were so many things that we lacked, and the
university started to grow, and we needed to keep
up with that growth. We needed to encourage the
building of homes, and we needed to institute
ordinances that were necessary, like fire code,
building code, ordinances that had to do with
zoning, and things of this nature. And for years,
we had, I mean, we were just all the time trying to
step out and be a little forward in all these areas.
Well, the zoning, what was the most of the zoning?
Was it mostly residential type zoning at that time
when you first? Well, residential primarily. And
of course, then eventually we got into zoning for
business and the like. But when did this, I know
this shopping center over here now is probably
the, it's been here for as long as I know it was one of
the first ones that I can remember when I was going
to school here. Well, that was four years ago, big
deal. But this shopping center over here, when did
that first go in? Was it Gibson's? Oh, well,
that's, yeah. Oh, gee, you know, I get rusty on
dates.
In the 60s, was it? Yeah, that must have been the
late, Yeah, that was about the middle 60s when that
area was developed because there was nothing in
there. I mean, that was all open land as is the area
across the street there, the highway. That was
all. You remember who that land was owned by?
People over there before it was sold? There were
several ownerships. I don't recall just who they
were. I see. But... That was practically all
farmland from there south. There was nothing in
there. Now, speaking of park area, just a moment,
Jerry. If I might, we had the Lincoln School. It was
a Negro school where the Lincoln Center now is. And
that area burned. And at that period in our school
history, Then the Negro population was moved into
the white school, and we have been integrated ever
since. Well, now that left that facility down
there, that was school property and unoccupied.
And the city council made a deal with the school
system whereby we would use that as a recreational
area. And I recall I got a lot of criticism again on
this by moving out in this direction, but I think
time has proved that it has served a good need in
that community. Now, we had a lot of problems to
start with, very discouraging, because at night
people would knock out the glass and break the
doors and the furniture. And I'll tell you, I
became discouraged lots of times. But faith
prevailed, and fortunately today, it's taken
care of, and I'm glad that it is serving the need in
that particular community. Now, the swimming
pool, of course, at one time, we were directly, you
might say, well, all my children and others of
faculty and staff, the recreational activities
were actually provided by Texas A&M. And with the
increasing use by the students, it became obvious
that gradually we would have to get off campus,
just like our school. The university actually
nurtured our city. I see. And like in the school,
while we saw and we could foresee that we needed a
swimming pool, we needed the development of our
parks and things of this nature. So, of course,
this was another forward step that we had to make.
with the limited finances that we had available to
us. The school for College Station children was on
the campus, and then when it moved off, it moved off
to where it still is now. The chicken coops. Right.
Where they call them the chicken coops. I see.
Well, as I said, the university actually nurtured
the city and gradually it became necessary for us
in terms of water, the school, recreation,
housing, things of this nature to take over and
gradually go ahead. I'm happy to say that we have
done it on a very reasonable As a city, we do not have
a large indebtedness. It's not one that we can't
carry with the bonds that we have. We've been
pretty much a pay-as-you-go. We've tried to, or at
least I did when I was on the council, work with the
leaders of the student body. Matter of fact, the
lights that were put on the west side of the campus
to prevent where the students parked their cars
here in late years. Working with the university,
we chipped in on the cost for the mercury vapor
lights that's on the west side of the campus. And
this was even brought out in court against me when
they had me down here in county court. They
criticized me for working with the university and
the students. And my position then was, as it is
now, that the student body itself helped pay for
this through the sales tax and other things that
they purchased. And we rightfully need to
compensate them for what they did.
I think the student body as a whole that got larger,
I guess, had a lot more of a buying power in the
stores and merchandise in this area, and it's
something that needed to be not really
compensated for, but needed to be understood and
respect it, I guess, because they... Oh, yes,
definitely so. You can judge this by the business
activities during the holiday period when the
students are not here. Right. And this I respect
very much, and I've always said that, of course, I
wear a college station on my heart
in terms of the pride in my city and the university.
Of course, being a university employee, or having
been one, and very loyal to my city, and having been
brought up when people were against us, you might
say, imposed on me a little more loyalty, perhaps,
than some new newcomer coming in today.
You might say, well, you're an old-timer. Yes, I'm
an old-timer, but I remember you know the growing
city and what it meant to us and how hard we strive to
even though when we put in our little consolidated
school over here we had a very small enrollment and
with what taxes we had trying to expand that system
we almost every month or so we had a program of some
kind to try to raise money to put in sidewalks
provide this or provide that. We just, we came up
the hard way. Right. And this is part of that
loyalty that I referred to. Right.
We, you got a little more there, Jim? Yeah, you go
ahead. I'm just looking over, you know, the little
sheet that I have here, and in terms of Showing
leadership, I always took this position, joining
with the council, the council joining with me,
that we were planning to make College Station a
showpiece for any city, I mean, with the progress.
And for a while, you know, I'm thinking here of the
public health issue of mosquitoes and diseases
that it carries. And we were one of the first cities
in this part of the country to institute the traps
that would catch mosquitoes. Well, now when was
this work started in this area? Oh, I would say,
Jerry, that was around 1967. And the purpose
there, of course, was to prevent disease. And
these mosquitoes were then shipped down to
Houston and looked at. But for Brazos County, this
was the first that we instituted. And now another
thing that I pushed very hard was this emergency
telephone number, 99, 911, that very few people
are aware of today, and I regret that they are not
acquainted with it. Because in times of
emergency, if the number 911 was drilled into a
person's mind, you could dial this number in the
dark. It is a universal number that is used in many
parts of the United States and in foreign
countries, even Canada. And I tried to, well, I did
bring this innovation into this area. And at the
time I was working on it, I asked the city of Bryan if
they were interested in coming in with me, and they
were not. The county was not interested. So
single-handedly, we pushed this for College
Station. And this is another first. We were one of
the few cities in the state of Texas to have this
emergency number. Now, unfortunately, I did not
live, I mean, my service as mayor was such that the
system was installed shortly after I left. And
unfortunately, the people were made unaware of
the importance of this number. Now, this 911 is
dialed into our police station, and they have a
record down there of any message through 911 is
emergency. And they have a list of doctors and
anybody else that you might need in terms of an
emergency. Now, a recent event just happened here
in College Station where a man had a heart attack.
The wife went to the telephone. She didn't know the
doctor's number. She didn't think about even
trying to dial zero. She was frustrated while her
husband had a heart attack out in the lot. Here is
where I say that if this 911 was indelibly
impressed on everybody's mind in terms of a heart
attack, if you need oxygen, if you need a doctor in
an emergency, things of this nature. There's a
prowler outside your window. Your wife could
discreetly go to the phone in the dark and number
911 and get the prowler in the act. Unfortunately,
this has not been publicized enough really
warrant its use today. But it's very, very
unfortunate. Well, how about in the area of public
health and care? What has, have there been any
ideas considered for a hospital, a college
station hospital? Are they used to use the Brazos?
Is there a hospital in Bryan? We worked on this,
Jerry, before I went out as mayor. We had hopes, and
I still have hopes today, that someday we will get a
smaller hospital out in this area. I know I was born
in the hospital over here, St. Joseph's Hospital
down in Bryan. Oh, you were? When my father was
going to school here. I just wondered about that.
Yeah. Well, then the new hospital, St. Joseph's
Hospital, we worked hard to get that. That is a city
council there, as a regional hospital. And then
subsequently, the old Bryan Hospital moved from
their location downtown up to where nearby St.
Joseph's. But that is now run by a number of
doctors. And we had hopes of getting that
particular chain interested in coming out to
college days. But in a lot of things you do, Jerry,
there are politics
at a higher level. And I'm not denying this. And
this has seriously affected our city in times in
the past. But the city is growing. And I have reason
to hope that in the near future, in the next few
years, we will see a hospital of some type in this
particular area. I dare say, and I said this while
as mayor, that the time will come when the city of
College Station will be larger than the city of
Bryan. Each year, the percentage of increase is
showing this in terms of College Station over
Bryan. And we will be the dominant city of the two
cities. We have the area to the south for this
particular growth. And anyone riding around the
city today, it's so obvious the potential in this
particular area in contrast to brine. Now
limitations are set on both cities in terms of the
flood plain to the east, the railroad track, and
other university holdings to the west. But we can
grow south. If and when the Milliken Dam ever comes
in, why this will really make for an explosive
situation, I believe, in our area in terms of
population growth. And you know perhaps as well as
I, that many people are coming to this area to
retire. And we have, in the Brazos County area now,
six retirees groups. And it's surprising to see
the number of them. Of course, a lot of them are
faculty and staff from A&M. But a lot of retired
officers are coming here to live. because of the
opportunities that Texas A&M presents to
anybody. The opportunities are here for
anything, so they come here. Well, when the city
first incorporated itself, how large has it grown
in size? Not in population size, mainly, but in,
say, footage or acreage size. Can you, you know how
much? Is it double, say? Oh, it's more than double.
In terms of acreage, I'm a little rusty on the
figures now, but I would say that it has increased
10 times over what it was originally back in Well,
even as late as the 1950s, it's increased that
much. Well, you said there were six miles of
difference between the Bryan and the College
Station sea limits back in around 1939. Is that
right? Yes. Well, which way... Has Brian taken
over most of that six miles? Well, yeah. Well, see,
when Brian extended their six miles, that gave
them living room. And thus the development on
Highway 6, as you see it today, primarily. Then the
extension out towards 29th Street. Not that way.
Our growth principally had to be to the south. To
the south. Yes. Because we were limited in terms of
the railroad track and university holdings to the
west. Right. And then we have the airport out
there, and this has a limiting factor on
development there. Any structure over, you know,
one story high because of the flight pattern. And
then with the future development of that airport,
and I'm sure this is coming in not too many years,
perhaps ten years, you will see a large expansion
at Easterwood to take care of all the regional
traffic that is being generated even now. But our
growth primarily is in the south and, of course,
some to the east towards the floodplain.
Well, now, on that floodplain limitation, that's
for the Navasota River, is that right? Yeah,
that's right. Now, of course, we, in terms of
ordinances, We put in the sewage disposal plant
down there just before I got on the council. Before
that, here's another instance where we're tied
into the university, and eventually we went to our
own sewage disposal plant. In the case of meat, we
had a problem, as any cities do that do not have a
meat ordinance, all kind of meat is dumped into an
area where there is no ordinance prohibiting it.
And we had to do that. You said that one time you used
a water supply for the city. You had to come from the
university and from Bryan. Now, do you still, I
guess now, do you have your own wells now or not? We
do not have our own water supply. At the present
time, we buy both water and electricity from the
city of Bryan. And, of course, this helps Bryan in
the sense that they generate Well, I guess about
one third of the revenues that the city of Bryan
generates comes from College Station. And this
has enabled them to get into the construction
program, like that lake and so on that they have
there, that new cooling lake, has enabled them to
expand their production for our use as well. Now,
say the growth back in the 1940s or so of College
Station, was the influx of people into this area,
was it mostly due to, I guess it was mostly due to the
university being new staff and as the university
grew, more people came into it. Were there any
other outside businesses or manufacturing
organizations that the city tried to promote in
this area, College Station, or did they not? Well,
we did, Jerry. Over the years, what we were trying
to get into College Station, and I would still
recommend we do, are industries that are
university-oriented. The university has
facilities out here like the data processing
center and all the expertise in all these areas.
that could be made available for quality. I know we
worked pretty hard when I was in there to get the
Banana Institute here at A&M to set up their
primary research facilities in this particular
university community so that they would have the
benefit of expertise in these various areas, soil
and water and everything else. for some reason
they did not see fit to come here. But some of the
universities in the community came for this
particular reason. And this is a type of
encouragement I have very much discouraged, like
chicken pluckers and things of this nature,
because not only is it a low scale outfit where they
come into a city, But then it creates a problem like
for a sewage disposal plant. When you get feathers
and things like this in a sewage disposal system,
it wrecks it pretty bad. So things like this I had
never encouraged personally.
Now I did, as mayor, I might point this out. give
every homeowner every year an annual report on the
stewardship of our city. When I went in as mayor, I
felt this was an obligation on my part to let the
people know about our income and our outgo and what
we did, what the city employees were doing, things
of this nature. And right after I left, the annual
report ceased. We have never received a report
from our city government. I deem this very
unfortunate. Now, if the city has gotten so big
that they feel that they cannot do this in terms of
an annual report, I do feel that they owe it to the
public through the media of the newspaper or the
bat, you know, annual report to the citizens on
their stewardship. Now, the cities of San Angelo,
San Antone, a lot of these cities do this. And I see
no reason why we shouldn't consider or continue to
do this. But since I left, there's been no annual
report to the citizens on the stewardship of our
city. I throw this out because I was really sold on
this matter of communicating with the citizens.
And also in recognizing the bad blood that had been
created earlier between the City of Bryan and
College Station and the like, I did institute
meetings where we met maybe every three or four
months. Had a little dinner meeting where we could
discuss what the City of College Station was
doing, and we had hoped that Bryan would do the same
thing. so as to prevent any future
misunderstandings or problems that might arise
that each of us, you know, we're not familiar with.
And as I mentioned earlier, you know, there was
some bad blood originally between the two cities.
I guess we're almost about out of tape here. I just
wanted to... say thank you and appreciated it and I
guess that's about all really I just thanks for the
time well Jerry it's been my pleasure I could go on
for hours beginning in you know each of the areas I
mean public transportation you name it public
health and I'm just full of it I mean because I have
been involved even this sheet that I have here This
is one that I, for example, to feel out the public in
terms of every area of growth, expansion, and area
of activity within the city of College Station. I
sent this out, this is what, about 40 pages, and had
many citizens review what I consider to be a plan of
action. And they returned it with their critique,
and this formed the basis of my... tenure in office
and trying to do what was needed in the community.
So I thank you, Jerry.